Add guidance on moving from dbt-spark to dbt-databricks (#1435)
dbt-labs/docs.getdbt.com: website/docs/guides/migration/tools/migrating-from-spark-to-databricks.md

---
title: "Migrating from dbt-spark to dbt-databricks"
id: "migrating-from-spark-to-databricks"
---

## Pre-requisites

In order to migrate to dbt-databricks, your project must be compatible with `dbt 1.0` or greater as dbt-databricks is not supported pre `dbt 1.0`.

## Why change to dbt-databricks?

The Databricks team, in collaboration with dbt Labs, built on top of the foundation that the dbt Labs’ dbt-spark adapter provided, and they added some critical improvements. The dbt-databricks adapter offers an easier set up, as it only requires three inputs for authentication, and it also has more features available via the Delta file format.

### Authentication Simplification

Previously users had to provide a `cluster` or `endpoint` ID which was hard to parse out of the http_path provided in the Databricks UI. Now the dbt-databricks profile requires the same inputs regardless if you are using a Cluster or a SQL endpoint. All you need to provide is:
- the hostname of the Databricks workspace
- the HTTP path of the Databricks SQL endpoint or cluster
- an appropriate credential

### Better defaults

> With dbt-databricks, by default, dbt models will use the Delta format and expensive queries will be accelerated with the [Photon engine](https://docs.databricks.com/runtime/photon.html). See [the caveats section of Databricks Profile documentation](https://docs.getdbt.com/reference/warehouse-profiles/databricks-profile#choosing-between-dbt-databricks-and-dbt-spark) for more information.

Author: ```suggestion
With dbt-databricks, by default, dbt models will use the Delta format and expensive queries will be accelerated with the [Photon engine](https://docs.databricks.com/runtime/photon.html). See [the caveats section of Databricks Profile documentation](https://docs.getdbt.com/reference/warehouse-profiles/databricks-profile#choosing-between-dbt-databricks-and-dbt-spark) for more information. Any declared configurations of `file_format = 'delta'` are now redundant and can be removed.
```

---
title: "Migrating from dbt-spark to dbt-databricks"
id: "migrating-from-spark-to-databricks"
---

## Pre-requisites

> In order to migrate to dbt-databricks, your project must be compatible with `dbt 1.0` or greater as dbt-databricks is not supported pre `dbt 1.0`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In order to migrate to dbt-databricks, your project must be compatible with `dbt 1.0` or greater as dbt-databricks is not supported pre `dbt 1.0`. [This guide](https://docs.getdbt.com/guides/migration/versions/upgrading-to-v1.0) will help you upgrade your project if necessary.
```

## Why change to dbt-databricks?

The Databricks team, in collaboration with dbt Labs, built on top of the foundation that the dbt Labs’ dbt-spark adapter provided, and they added some critical improvements. The dbt-databricks adapter offers an easier set up, as it only requires three inputs for authentication, and it also has more features available via the Delta file format.

### Authentication Simplification

> Previously users had to provide a `cluster` or `endpoint` ID which was hard to parse out of the http_path provided in the Databricks UI. Now the dbt-databricks profile requires the same inputs regardless if you are using a Cluster or a SQL endpoint. All you need to provide is:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Previously users had to provide a `cluster` or `endpoint` ID which was hard to parse out of the http_path provided in the Databricks UI. Now the [dbt-databricks profile](https://docs.getdbt.com/reference/warehouse-setups/databricks-setup) requires the same inputs regardless if you are using a Cluster or a SQL endpoint. All you need to provide is:
```

- the hostname of the Databricks workspace

> - the HTTP path of the Databricks SQL endpoint or cluster

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- the HTTP path of the Databricks SQL warehouse or cluster
```

When an admin changes the dbt Cloud's connection to use the dbt-databricks adapter instead of the dbt-spark adapter, your team will not lose their credentials. This makes migrating from dbt-spark to dbt-databricks straightforward as it only requires deleting the connection and re-adding the cluster/endpoint information. Both the admin and users of the project need not re-enter personal access tokens.

#### Procedure

An admin of the dbt Cloud project running on Databricks should take the following steps to migrate from using the generic Spark adapter to the Databricks-specfic adapter. This should not cause any downtime for production jobs, but we recommend that you schedule the connection change when there is not heavy IDE usage for your team to avoid disruption.

> 1. Select Account Settings in the main navigation bar.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Select **Account Settings** in the main navigation bar.
```

2. On the Projects tab, scroll until you find the project you'd like to migrate to the new dbt-databricks adapter.
3. Click the hyperlinked Connection for the project.
4. Click the "Edit" button in the top right corner.

> 5. Click "Delete Connection" at the bottom of the page, and then confirm ythat you'd like to delete the connection.

Reviewer 2: This will need to be updated for the new adaptor selection via radio button group.

> 5. Click "Delete Connection" at the bottom of the page, and then confirm ythat you'd like to delete the connection.
> 
>     > :warning:, the only information that will be deleted is the cluster or endpoint host and id. Your credential will still be saved. See above note.
> 5. After being brought back to the project overview page, click "Configure a connection" so that you can start the connection flow for the new dbt-databricks adapter.
> 6. Select the Databricks adapter that is not listed as "to be depecated", and enter:
>     1. the `hostname`
>     2. `http_path`, and
> 7. Click save.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
5. Select Databricks for the warehouse
6. Select Databricks (dbt-databricks) for the adapter and enter:
    1. the `hostname`
    2. the `http_path`
    3. optionally the catalog name
7. Click save.
```

With dbt-databricks, by default, dbt models will use the Delta format and expensive queries will be accelerated with the [Photon engine](https://docs.databricks.com/runtime/photon.html). See [the caveats section of Databricks Profile documentation](https://docs.getdbt.com/reference/warehouse-profiles/databricks-profile#choosing-between-dbt-databricks-and-dbt-spark) for more information.

> Additionally, dbt-databricks's default `incremental_strategy` is now `merge`. If you were using the default version of incremental materializations with dbt-spark, you were using "incremental_strategy=append", and if you'd like to continue doing so, you'll have to set this config specifically on your incremental models. Read more [about `incremental_strategy` in dbt](https://docs.getdbt.com/docs/building-a-dbt-project/building-models/configuring-incremental-models#about-incremental_strategy). If you had already specified `incremental_strategy=merge` on your incremental models, you do not need to change anything when moving to dbt-databricks, though you could remove the param as it is now the default.

Author: @asteichen how does this language sound to you?

Author: ```suggestion
Additionally, dbt-databricks's default `incremental_strategy` is now `merge`. The default `incremental_strategy` with dbt-spark is `append`.
If you have been using the default `incremental_strategy=append` with dbt-spark, and would like to continue doing so, you'll have to set this config specifically on your incremental models. Read more [about `incremental_strategy` in dbt](https://docs.getdbt.com/docs/building-a-dbt-project/building-models/configuring-incremental-models#about-incremental_strategy).
If you already specified `incremental_strategy=merge` on your incremental models, you do not need to change anything when moving to dbt-databricks, though you could remove the param as it is now the default.
```
